---
title: 'Hustle free DB installation. Docker introduction'
date: 2021-11-16
permalink: /posts/2021/11/docker-db/
tags:
  - docker
  - postgres
  - mysql
  - mongodb
---

[comment]: <> (запуск базы данных на компьютере)
<!--- Wrap text Докер - инструмент изоляции 
Run some database in a Docker
Hustle free DB installation. Docker introduction
Image vs container 
---> 
<!---
cool articles
https://docs.docker.com/
https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/7-cases-when-not-to-use-docker/
--->

## Intro to docker

Docker is an enterprise-centric container platform to build, share and run any application. Containers do not have operating system of their own. They rely on kernel of the host OS which makes them lightweight. Docker allows you to "package" an application with all its environment and dependencies into a container that can be deployed on any Linux system with support for [cgroups](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/admin-guide/cgroup-v1/cgroups.html) in the kernel, and also provides a set of commands for managing these containers. Docker has its own library that abstracts the virtualization capabilities of the Linux kernel - [libcontainer](https://github.com/docker-archive/libcontainer). Written in the [Go](https://golang.org/) language.

Docker advantages:
* flexible
* light with not much demand on system resources
* easy to deploy

Docker disadvantages:
* need root privileges
* the complexity of data storage (all data held in a container is wiped off when you shut down the container)
* poor monitoring
* platform dependency (there are ways to run docker on Windows / Mac, but this is not the best implementation at the moment)

The most popular docker alternatives are Oracle's Virtual Box, LXC Linux container, Kubernetes (K8), Podman, etc.

[Docker vs VMs?](https://cloudacademy.com/blog/docker-vs-virtual-machines-differences-you-should-know/) 

The first question before using docker should be: when should you use docker?

* Use Docker when you have lot of services which work in an isolated manner and serve as a data provider to a web apps
* Use Docker if you want to setup a nosql database (MongoDB)
* Use Docker if you want to setup a sql database (Postgres, MySQL)
* Use Docker as version control system for your entire app's operating system
* Use Docker whenever your app needs to go through multiple phases of development (dev/test/qa/prod)

Also you can read [cases when you shouldn't use Docker](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/7-cases-when-not-to-use-docker/).

## How to install
You can install Docker on different OS. Installation guide can be found on the following [page](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/).

## Basic docker commands

There are some "child" commands that make it easier to work with Docker.
<!---pull, build, run, exec, stop, images, container.--->

To list available commands, either run docker with no parameters or execute docker help:

``` bash
docker run --help
```

Register entry without / with localhost setting:

```bash
docker login

docker login localhost: 8080
```

Log out of the registry:

```bash
docker logout [SERVER]
```

Search for an image
```bash
docker search busybox

docker search - f stars = 3 --no-trunc busybox
```

* --filter , -f - filter output based on conditions provided

Pull image:

```bash
docker pull debian
```
By default, docker pull pulls a single image from the from Docker Hub. A repository can contain multiple images. To pull all images from a repository, provide the -a (or --all-tags) option when using docker pull.

The following command pulls the testing/test-image image from a local registry listening on port 5000 (myregistry.local:5000):
```bash
docker pull myregistry.local:5000/testing/test-image
```

Push (upload to the registry) image:
```bash
docker push eon01 / nginx

docker push myregistry.local:5000/testing/test-image
```

### Actions with containers

Container creation and start:
```bash
docker create -t ​​-i eon01 / infinite --name infinite
```
* -t - allocate a pseudo-TTY
* -i - keep STDIN open even if not attached
* --name - ssign a name to the container
* eon01 / infinite - directory

The first launch of the container:
```bash
docker run -it --name infinite -d eon01 / infinite
```

Renaming a container:
```bash
docker rename infinite infinity
```

Removing a container:
```bash
docker rm infinite
```

Container update:
```bash
docker update --cpu-shares 512 -m 300M infinite
```
* -m - memory limit
* --cpu-shares - CPU shares (relative weight)

Connect to an existing container:
```bash
docker attach busybox
```

### Image management

List of looks:
```bash
docker images
```

Creation of images:
```bash
docker build -

docker build github.com/creack/docker-firefox

docker build - <Dockerfile

docker build - <context.tar.gz

docker build -t eon / infinite.

docker build -f myOtherDockerfile.

curl example.com/remote/Dockerfile | docker build -f -
```
* --file , -f - name of the Dockerfile (Default is 'PATH/Dockerfile')
* --tag , -t - name and optionally a tag in the 'name:tag' format

Creating an image from a container:
```bash
docker commit infinity
```

Push (upload to the registry) image:
```bash
docker push eon01 / infinity
```

## Docker Hub

Docker Hub is a public repository where you can upload your images to work with your team or other users at the same time.
To create a repository, you need to register in [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/). I recommend you to read more about the benefits of Docker Hub [here](https://geekflare.com/docker-hub-introduction/).

## Run SQL database in docker

### PostgreSQL
Postgres is a widely-used relational database with reach number of features. Docker Hub is used to get the Docker image.

The following commands can be used to start the Postgres in a Docker container: 

```bash
docker pull postgres

docker run --rm -p 5432:5432 --name pg_test \
  -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=mypassword -d postgres
```

Let's take a deeper look in a `docker run` command. Following arguments are used in the command:

* `--rm` - remove container on exit 
* `-p 5432:5432` - forward 5432 port from Docker container to a local host port 5432 
* `--name pg_test` - assign name pg_test to a running container 
* `-e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=mypassword` - create environment variable POSTGRES_PASSWORD with value mypassword inside the container
* `-d postgres` - name of the image, we want to run 

To get more information visit [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/_/postgres/), or official [GitHub repo](https://github.com/docker-library/postgres/).

### MySQL
MySQL is another widely-used relational database management system.

To get and run MySQL database in a Docker container execute:
For verification connection is used Dbeaver. 

```bash
docker pull mysql

docker run --rm --name docker_mysql -p 3306:3306 -e MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=123456 -d mysql
```

If you face problems with connection 'Public Key Retrieval is not allowed' try another port and go to  `Edit connection` -> `Driver properties` -> `Connection properties` and set `allowPublicKeyRetrieval` - true, `useSSL` - false.

Regarding docker run arguments used the same as `docker run` for Postgres.

## Run NoSQL database in Docker

### MongoDB

MongoDB is a NoSQL database program uses JSON-like documents with optional schemas. As is known an official MongoDB container image called mongo exists in the docker container registry. To download the latest official Docker image for the MongoDB database: 

```bash
docker pull mongo
```
To run MongoDB in a Docker container execute:

```bash
docker run --name mongodb -d -e MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME=AzureDiamond -e \
MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD=mypassword12 mongo
```
Regarding docker run arguments used the same as `docker run` for Postgres.

## Conclusion

Docker is commonly used for isolation of the user space. It's easy to start and run once you have install Docker. Also it's convinient to run to multiple environments in the same time. 

From disadvantages networking might get complicated as well as memory consumtion. Also Docker will not fit for Linux kernel development, because Docker doesn't run the kernel and shares the kernel with the host. Docker highly optimized with Linux, but runs with overheads in Windows and Mac.





