---
title: 'C++ coding rules, that you should start using today. Review of S. Mayers books.'
date: 2021-08-23
permalink: /posts/2021/08/review-s-mayers-books/
tags:
  - c++
  - best practices
---

There are a lot of good books about best practices in C++. S. Mayers books are one of my favorite. Each advice is really great and I encourage to read all of them. Here I will just highlight my favorite. They are not he best or the most valuable. It is my personal top rules.

## Who is Scott Mayers and why his books might be relevant for you?

Scott Mayers is an author and actively contributes to the C++ community. He is a speaker on multiple C++ and developers conferences.

If you want to get better familiar with his talks, visit [Scott's official web-page](https://www.aristeia.com/videos.html).

## What books I will cover?

I am a big fan of explicitly these [books](https://www.aristeia.com/books.html):
1. Effective Modern C++
2. Effective C++
3. Effective STL
4. More Effective C++


My goal is just to highlight my favorite tips. I strongly encourage every one who writes C++ read all of them. You will learn a lot on early stage of your career from these books.

## Top favorite rules

All rues are not sorted and selection is based on my personal preferences and experience.

### Effective C++ Third edition, 55 Specific ways to improve your programs and design

1. Item 2: Prefer const, enums and inlines to define.

I think it is important to say I understand this rule not directly. The rule for me more says, prefer instruments that are part of the language and allow you better track the lifetime and behavior of the object.

Define is the macros. So lets imagine we have:
```
#define PI 3.14159
```

In this case, compiler will replace all PI symbols with 3.14159. It will not check the type or any other build-in checks. It will blindly replace it.
It means you as a developer loos a lot of useful information, like warnings and optimizations from compiler.

```
#include <iostream>

void f(int a) { std::cout << a << std::endl; }

#define CALL_WITH_MAX(a,b) f((a) > (b) ? (a) : (b))

int main() {
    int a = 5, b = 0;
    CALL_WITH_MAX(++a, b);
    CALL_WITH_MAX(++a, b+10);

    std::cout << a << " " << b << std::endl;
    
    return 0;
}
```
Have fun debugging and understanding why `a = 8`.

2. Item 8: Prevent exceptions from leaving destructors.
3. Item 18: Make interfaces easy to use correctly and hard to use incorrectly.
4. Item 29: Strive for exception-safe code.
5. Item 52: Write placement delete if you write placement new.
6. Item 53: Pay attention to compiler warnings.

### More effective C++ 35 new ways to improve your programs and design

1. Item 1: Distinguish between pointers and references.
2. Item 2: Prefer C++-style casts.
3. Item 15: Understand the costs of the exception handling.
4. Item 23: Consider alternative libraries.
5. Item 28: Smart pointers.

### Effective STL 50 specific ways to improve your use of the standard templated library

1. Item 1: Choose yor container with care.
2. Item 10: Be aware of allocator conventions and restrictions.
3. Item 12: Have realistic expectations about the thread safety of STL containers.
4. Item 13: Prefer vector and string to dynamically allocated arrays.
5. Item 14: Avoid using vector<bool>.
6. Item 24: Choose carefully between map::operator[] and map::insert() when efficiency is important.
7. Item 33: Be wary of remove-like algorithms on containers of pointers.
8. Item 43: Prefer algorithm calls to hand-written loops.

### Effective modern C++ 42 specific ways to improve your use of C++11 and C++14

1. Item 7: Distinguish between () and {} when creating objects.
2. Item 15: Use constexpt whenever possible.
3. Item 21: Use std::wek_ptr for std::shared_ptr-like pointer that can dangle.
4. Item 33: Use decltype on auto&& parameters to std::forward them.
5. Item 34: Prefer lamdbas to std::bind.
6. Item 40: Use std::atomic for concurrency, volatile for special memory.

## What to take out from this article

